Captioning sp
Captioning sponsored by WNET
>> Stewart: AMERICA IN BLACK AND
BLUE.
ON THIS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND
SPECIAL REPORT.
RIGHT BEFORE OUR EYES, TWO BLACK
MEN KILLED BY POLICE, FIVE
DALLAS OFFICERS GUNNED DOWN,
MOURNING THE LOSSES.
DEMANDING JUSTICE AND SEEKING
COMMON GROUND.
>> WE ARE NOT AS DIVIDED AS WE
THINK.
>> Stewart: NEXT, ON AMERICA IN
BLACK AND BLUE: A PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND SPECIAL REPORT.
>>PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND IS MADE
POSSIBLE BY:
BERNARD AND IRENE SCHWARTZ.
JUDY AND JOSH WESTON.
THE CHERYL AND PHILIP MILSTEIN
FAMILY.
THE JOHN AND HELEN GLESSNER
FAMILY TRUST.
SUPPORTING TRUSTWORTHY
JOURNALISM THAT INFORMS AND
INSPIRES.
SUE AND EDGAR WACHENHEIM, III.
CORPORATE FUNDING IS PROVIDED
BY MUTUAL OF AMERICA--
DESIGNING CUSTOMIZED INDIVIDUAL
AND GROUP RETIREMENT PRODUCTS.
THAT'S WHY WE ARE YOUR
RETIREMENT COMPANY.
ADDITIONAL SUPPORT HAS BEEN
PROVIDED BY:
AND BY THE CORPORATION FOR
PUBLIC BROADCASTING, AND BY
CONTRIBUTIONS TO YOUR PBS
STATION FROM VIEWERS LIKE YOU.
THANK YOU.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
I'M ALISON STEWART.
TONIGHT AS WE ABSORB THE HORROR
OF THE ATTACK IN FRANCE, HERE IN
THE UNITED STATES WE ARE STILL
SUFFERING AFTER A PERIOD OF
INCREDIBLE VIOLENCE-- THE
KILLING OF TWO AFRICAN AMERICAN
MEN BY POLICE OFFICERS IN
MINNESOTA AND LOUISIANA, AND THE
SHOOTING OF POLICE OFFICERS IN
DALLAS.
AMERICANS ARE PAINED,
FRIGHTENED, AND DISMAYED OVER
THE LONG-STANDING RACIAL ISSUES
THAT THREATEN ALL OUR SAFETY.
WE ARE HERE TONIGHT TO DIG
DEEPER.
WE'RE GOING TO HEAR FROM AFRICAN
AMERICAN PARENTS ABOUT THE TALK
THEY HAVE WITH THEIR CHILDREN
ABOUT LAW ENFORCEMENT, FROM
POLICE RECRUITS WHO FEAR THEY
MIGHT MAKE A DEADLY MISTAKE,
FROM PROTESTERS AND THOSE WHO
THINK PROTESTORS HAVE GONE TOO
FAR.
WE KNOW YOU ARE HAVING THIS
CONVERSATION IN YOUR LIVING
ROOMS, YOUR CHURCHES, ON THE
STREET AND IN SCHOOLS.
JOIN OUR CONVERSATION BY USING
THE HASHTAG
#AMERICABLACKANDBLUEPBS.
DESPITE REAL PAIN AND ANGER, IT
IS NOT ALL ABOUT THE SHOUTING.
WE ARE HERE TONIGHT TO REPORT
AND TO EXPLORE HOW PEOPLE ACROSS
THE COUNTRY CAN FIND COMMON
GROUND.
TENSION BETWEEN POLICE AND
AFRICAN AMERICANS IS NOT NEW.
WE DECIDED TO GO TO NEWARK, NEW
JERSEY, WHERE 49 YEARS AGO THIS
WEEK, THE CITY WAS ENGULFED IN
RACE RIOTS TOUCHED OFF WHEN A
BLACK TAXI DRIVER WAS PULLED
OVER AND THEN BEATEN BY WHITE
POLICE OFFICERS.
IN THE MONTHS THAT FOLLOWED,
PROTESTS AND RIOTS SWEPT THE
COUNTRY.
TODAY, NEWARK IS STILL
STRUGGLING AND PEOPLE ARE STILL
PROTESTING.
THIS WEEK WE HEARD ANGER AND
FEAR EXPRESSED AT A MARCH.
THERE WERE ALSO SIGNS OF HOPE
AND PROGRESS.
WE ASKED MICHAEL HILL, A
CORRESPONDENT FOR NEW JERSEY
PUBLIC TELEVISION, TO PUT THE
STORY IN PERSPECTIVE.
>> WHAT DO WE WANT?
JUSTICE.
>> Reporter: A PROTEST IN NEWARK
AGAINST POLICE BRUTALITY IS
NOTHING NEW.
49 YEARS AGO THIS WEEK, NEW
JERSEY'S MOST POPULATED CITY
BURNED IN REBELLION.
MARTIAL LAW WAS IMPOSED AND
INDELIBLY STAINED THIS CITY, AND
THOSE WHO LIVED THROUGH IT-- AS
I DID IN NEWARK'S NORTH WARD AS
AN EIGHT-YEAR-OLD BOY.
I REMEMBER MY MOTHER REPEATEDLY
WARNING US NOT TO LOOK OUT THE
WINDOW FOR FEAR OF BEING SHOT.
BUT I MANAGED TO SNEAK A PEEK OR
TWO AND WHEN I LOOKED OUT, I
COULD SEE MILITARY VEHICLES AND
TROOPS WITH BIG GUNS ROLLING
DOWN 4th STREET.
BARBARA KING REMEMBERS THE FEAR
SHE HAD DURING THE RIOTS.
SHE SAYS LITTLE HAS CHANGED.
>> WE'RE STILL DYING.
BUT THANK GOD PEOPLE ARE STILL
STRUGGLING.
>> RICH CASALE.
WE'RE HERE TO ASSIST.
>> Reporter: A FEW DAYS AFTER
OFFICERS WERE KILLED IN DALLAS,
THE SHERIFF'S DEPARTMENT PUT
SHARPSHOOTERS ON ROOFTOPS ALONG
THIS PROTEST ROUTE PROTECTING
LIEUTENANT RICHARD CASALE AND
OTHER OFFICERS PROTECTING THE
PROTESTERS.
POLICE ENSURING THE FREE SPEECH
RIGHTS OF DEMONSTRATORS WHILE
THEIR UNIFORMS MAKE THEM TARGETS
ON THE STREETS.
>> I DON'T KNOW IF IT'S FEAR,
BUT IT'S A HEIGHTENED SENSE OF
YOUR SURROUNDINGS.
>> Reporter: LIEUTENANT CASALE
HAS NO ILLUSIONS ABOUT WHAT
POLICE ARE UP AGAINST.
>> I CAN BE VERY HONEST, PEOPLE
DO HAVE A DISTRUST.
>> Reporter: POLICE SHOT AND
KILLED 36-YEAR-OLD JERAME REID
IN THIS GRAPHIC DASH CAM VIDEO
OF A 2014 TRAFFIC STOP STILL
UNDER FEDERAL REVIEW.
THE KILLING HAS SO HARDENED
REID'S MOTHER, THIS IS WHAT SHE
SAYS ABOUT THE COPS MURDERED IN
DALLAS.
>> I HAVE NO FEELINGS FOR THOSE
OFFICERS THAT GOT TOOK OUT LAST
WEEK.
>> Reporter: THE ROOTS OF THE
ANGER, THE DISTRUST AND THE
EXASPERATION IN NEWARK SURFACED
IN JULY 2014 WHEN THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT'S THREE-YEAR
INVESTIGATION FOUND MANY NEWARK
POLICE OFFICERS OVERREACTED AND
ROUTINELY USED EXCESSIVE FORCE.
THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
CONCLUDED THAT 75% OF THE STOPS
ON THE STREET HAD NO
CONSTITUTIONAL BASIS.
IN THE FRONTLINE DOCUMENTARY,
"POLICING THE POLICE,"
FILMMAKERS RODE ALONG WITH
NEWARK OFFICERS AND CAPTURED THE
NOW-DISBANDED GANG UNIT
APPEARING TO TRAMPLE ON ONE'S
MAN RIGHTS.
>> YOU ARE NOT UNDER ARREST.
>> WHAT WERE YOUR THOUGHTS?
>> DESPICABLE.
THAT'S WHAT I COULD TELL YOU.
I COULD TELL YOU THAT THE
MAJORITY OF THE MEN AND WOMEN OF
THE NEWARK POLICE DEPARTMENT
DON'T ENGAGE IN THAT TYPE OF
ACTIVITY LIKE THAT.
I THINK THAT SOMETIMES THE
MISTAKES OR THE WRONGDOING
BECOMES THE NORM.
>> THE WAY YOU ALL APPROACHED
ME, ALL I WAS DOING WAS WALKING
HOME.
IF YOU HAD JUST ASKED ME, I
WOULD HAVE SAID I WAS WALKING
HOME.
DO NOT STEREOTYPE, CAUSE THAT'S
WHAT YOU ALL DID TO ME.
>> IT IS NOT AN ANOMALY.
WHAT WE SEE ARE POLICE OFFICERS
WHO WORK UNDER THE PRESSURE OF
QUOTAS, WHO ARE INADEQUATELY
TRAINED ON HOW TO ENGAGE IN A
LAWFUL STOP, AND WHO HAVE A
WARRIOR MENTALITY.
>> Reporter: IN JANUARY,
NEWARK'S MAYOR BROUGHT BACK THE
CITY'S FORMER POLICE DIRECTOR
AND CHIEF, ANTHONY AMBROSE.
AMBROSE WANTS HIS 992 OFFICERS
AND NEW RECRUITS TRAINED TO BE
FRIENDLIER AND MORE ENGAGING.
BUT HE SAYS IT WILL TAKE TIME TO
PUT HIS REFORMS INTO ACTION.
ARE THE REFORMS TAKING PLACE,
THE KIND OF REFORMS TO MAKE REAL
CHANGE?
>> THE JURY'S STILL OUT ON WHERE
WE ARE WHEN IT COMES TO
REFORMING THE NEWARK POLICE
DEPARTMENT.
>> Reporter: IN THE 1960s, THE
A.C.L.U. OF NEW JERSEY CALLED
FOR THE CREATION OF A CIVILIAN
COMPLAINT REVIEW BOARD IN
NEWARK.
NOW, FOR THE FIRST TIME IN ITS
350 YEARS, THE CITY HAS ONE.
ADVOCATES CONSIDER IT THE
STRONGEST IN THE NATION-- AT
LEAST ON PAPER-- WITH THE
AUTHORITY TO INVESTIGATE
MISCONDUCT COMPLAINTS, SUBPOENA
OFFICERS AND MAKE SURE
DISCIPLINE STICKS.
>> AND IT'S A REVIEW BOARD THAT
IS LED BY A MAJORITY OF PEOPLE
NOMINATED BY COMMUNITY AND CIVIL
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS.
SO, THAT IS AN INCREDIBLY
POSITIVE STEP FORWARD.
>> I THINK WE HAVE NOTHING TO
HIDE.
I THINK TRANSPARENCY IS VERY
GOOD.
>> Reporter: BUT OFFICERS AND
THEIR UNIONS WORRY THEY COULD BE
SECOND-GUESSED BY CIVILIANS WHO
HAVE NO UNDERSTANDING OF THE
DANGERS AND CHALLENGES OF
POLICING IN A PLACE LIKE NEWARK.
>> WE MAKE DECISIONS
INSTANTANEOUSLY.
IF YOU MONDAY QUARTERBACK AND
YOU HAVE AN HOUR TO DIGEST IT,
WHAT WE DID IN HALF A SECOND,
MAY LOOK UNREASONABLY.
>> I'M NOT TOTALLY ANTI-POLICE
BECAUSE IF SOMEBODY BREAK IN MY
HOME, I'M A CALL THE POLICE.
>> Reporter: REVEREND BRYANT ALI
IS ONE OF SEVEN COMMUNITY
MEMBERS SWORN IN TO THE CIVILIAN
COMPLAINT REVIEW BOARD.
>> IT'S NOT A CURE-ALL, BUT IT'S
A START AND IT'S BETTER THAN
WHAT WE HAD BEFORE.
>> Reporter: NEWARK SCHOOL
TEACHER BRIAN HOHMANN WAS ONE OF
SEVERAL WHITE MARCHERS WE MET IN
THE RECENT AND MOSTLY BLACK
PROTEST.
HOHMANN BELIEVES IN BLACK LIVES
MATTER BECAUSE HE SAYS THOSE
LIVES ARE AMONG THE MOST
VULNERABLE.
HE FEARS REFORMS CAN ONLY GO SO
FAR; FUNDAMENTAL CHANGE IS
NEEDED.
>> I DON'T THINK THAT POLICE
OFFICERS, INSIDE THEIR UNIFORMS,
INSIDE THEIR BODIES, ARE RACISTS
THEMSELVES SEEKING TO KILL BLACK
PEOPLE.
BUT I DO THINK THEY'RE SOMETHING
ABOUT THE ROLE OF POLICE
OFFICERS AND THE INSTITUTION OF
POLICING THAT LEADS TO RACIST
KILLINGS.
>> I WANT MY KIDS TO BE AWARE OF
WHAT'S GOING ON.
>> Reporter: WE ALSO MET ASHLEY
PARKER.
SHE CAME WITH HER SIX-YEAR-OLD
SON NYSIR AND EIGHT-YEAR-OLD
DAUGHTER NEVAEH.
SHE SAYS SHE LOST THREE TEENAGE
FRIENDS TO DEADLY ENCOUNTERS
WITH NEWARK POLICE A DECADE AGO,
BUT SHE SEES LAST WEEK'S
TRAGEDIES AS A TEACHABLE MOMENT
FOR POLICE AND PROTESTERS.
>> DO YOU THINK THIS WILL CHANGE
ANY TIME SOON, IN YOUR LIFETIME,
IN YOUR SON'S LIFETIME?
>> IN MY SON'S LIFETIME, YES.
I FEEL LIKE, IN MY SON'S
LIFETIME, YES, I DO.
>> Stewart: FINDING SOLUTIONS IS
NEVER EASY.
WE ASKED NEWSHOUR SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT CHRIS BURY TO LOOK
FOR A PLACE WHERE CHANGE IS
HAPPENING.
HE REPORTS NOW FROM MINNEAPOLIS,
JUST A FEW MILES FROM WHERE
PHILANDO CASTILE WAS SHOT AND
KILLED DURING A TRAFFIC STOP.
>> Reporter: WHATEVER THE EXACT
CIRCUMSTANCES THAT LED POLICE TO
PULL OVER PHILANDO CASTILE-- A
BROKEN TAILLIGHT OR THE
OFFICER'S SUSPICION HE RESEMBLED
A SUSPECT IN A ROBBERY-- THE
ANGER HERE IS FUELED BY A
FEELING THAT CASTILE DIED A
VIOLENT DEATH DURING A ROUTINE
POLICE STOP PRIMARILY BECAUSE HE
WAS A BLACK MAN.
THIS MAKESHIFT MEMORIAL MARKS
THE SPOT WHERE PHILANDO CASTILE
DIED AT THE HANDS OF POLICE.
FOR CASTILE, GETTING PULLED OVER
HERE IN A SUBURB OF ST. PAUL WAS
NOT AT ALL UNUSUAL.
COURT RECORDS SHOW POLICE HAD
STOPPED HIM MORE THAN 50 TIMES
SINCE 2002 FOR MISDEMEANORS
INCLUDING NOT HAVING A DRIVER'S
LICENSE AND NOT WEARING A
SEATBELT.
MOST OF THOSE PETTY OFFENSES
WERE EVENTUALLY DISMISSED.
>> WITHOUT THAT LOW LEVEL
OFFENSE, PHILANDO CASTILE WOULD
HAVE NEVER HAVE BEEN STOPPED.
>> Reporter: RON HARRIS IS
WORKING TO REFORM LOCAL LAWS
REGULATING LOW LEVEL OFFENSES
THAT HE SAYS ARE FAR MORE LIKELY
TO BE ENFORCED AGAINST BLACKS
THAN WHITES.
A PRACTICE THAT HARRIS SAYS
DRAWS MORE AFRICAN AMERICANS
DEEPER INTO THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE
SYSTEM.
>> DISPROPORTIONATELY, BLACK AND
BROWN MEN ARE TARGETED FOR THOSE
OFFENSES, AND THEY ARE VERY
RARELY CHARGED WITH THE LOW
LEVEL OFFENSE.
THEY ARE ACTUALLY CHARGED WITH A
HIGHER OFFENSE.
BUT THE ONLY WAY THE POLICE EVER
GOT TO THE HIGHER OFFENSE WAS
THROUGH THE ENTRY POINT OF THE
LOW LEVEL OFFENSE.
>> Reporter: LAST JUNE,
MNNEAPOLIS REPEALED TWO
MISDEMEANOR LAWS ENACTED DURING
THE 19th CENTURY, THAT BANNED
"SPITTING" AND "LURKING," OR
HIDING FOR THE PURPOSE OF
COMMITTING A CRIME.
NEKIMA LEVY-POUNDS, WHO HEADS
THE MINNEAPOLIS OFFICE OF THE
N.A.A.C.P., PUSHED FOR THE
CHANGE.
>> WE FOUND THAT IN MOST
JURISDICTIONS, LURKING WAS
UNCONSTITUTIONAL AND AS A MATTER
OF FACT, PEOPLE COULDN'T EVEN
EXPLAIN WHAT LURKING ACTUALLY
WAS.
SOMEONE STANDING AT A BUS STOP
COULD BE CONSIDERED LURKING.
>> Reporter: THE PRESIDENT OF
THE MINNEAPOLIS CITY COUNCIL,
BARB JOHNSON, WORRIED ABOUT HIGH
CRIME IN HER DISTRICT, CAST THE
ONLY VOTE AGAINST REPEALING THE
LAWS BANNING SPITTING AND
LURKING.
>> I AM CONCERNED THAT IF WE DO
AWAY WITH PENALTIES FOR THIS LOW
LEVEL KIND OF CRIME, THAT PEOPLE
WILL FEEL UNSAFE AND THEN LEAVE
MY COMMUNITY.
AND I DON'T WANT TO SEE THAT
HAPPEN.
>> Reporter: BUT MINNEAPOLIS
CITY RECORDS SHOW A CLEAR RACIAL
DISPARITY IN POLICE ENFORCEMENT.
FOR EXAMPLE, OF THE 392 PEOPLE
ARRESTED FOR LURKING BETWEEN
2009 AND 2014, 59% WERE AFRICAN
AMERICAN.
IN MINNEAPOLIS, BLACKS MAKE UP
ABOUT 19% OF THE POPULATION.
THE A.C.L.U., IN A STUDY OF ALL
LOW LEVEL CRIMES IN THE CITY,
FOUND AFRICAN AMERICANS WERE
NEARLY NINE TIMES MORE LIKELY TO
BE ARRESTED FOR SUCH OFFENSES
THAN WHITES.
>> THE REPORT HIGHLIGHTED ALL OF
THE WAYS IN WHICH PEOPLE OF
COLOR IN MINNEAPOLIS ARE FACING
HUGE DISPARITIES WHEN IT COMES
TO LOW LEVEL ARRESTS.
I THINK EVERYBODY KNEW THERE
WERE RACIAL DISPARITIES, BUT NOT
THE DEPTH OF THE PROBLEM.
>> Reporter: THE RACIAL TENSION
SURROUNDING THE ENFORCEMENT OF
LOW LEVEL CRIMES-- LIKE THE
POLICE STOP THAT LED TO THE
DEATH OF PHILANDO CASTILE-- IS
PART OF A LARGER NATIONAL DEBATE
OVER POLICING.
ONE PHILOSOPHY, KNOWN AS "BROKEN
WINDOWS," CALLS FOR AGGRESSIVE
POLICING OF SMALL CRIMES TO
PREVENT LARGER DISORDER IN THE
COMMUNITY.
LIEUTENANT BOB KROLL, WHO HEADS
THE MINNEAPOLIS POLICE UNION,
LIKENS IT TO FISHING.
>> LITTLE ARRESTS LEAD TO BIG
ARRESTS, AND IF YOU HAVE CAUSE
TO STOP SOMEONE FOR THE LURKING
CRIME AND DOING AN INVESTIGATORY
STOP, YOU MAY FIND OUT THAT THEY
HAVE WARRANTS FOR THEIR ARREST,
OR YOU MAY FIND OUT THAT, UPON
CLOSER LOOK, THEY ARE WANTED IN
A CRIME WHICH HAS BEEN OCCURRING
IN AN AREA YOU ARE POLICING AND
THEY MATCH A DESCRIPTION, AND
MAY WARRANT FURTHER QUESTIONING
FROM INVESTIGATORS.
>> Reporter: BUT ACTIVISTS IN
MINNEAPOLIS ARE PUSHING FOR A
MORE TOLERANT APPROACH.
THEY SAY THE REPEAL OF
ORDINANCES AGAINST LURKING AND
SPITTING IS JUST THE BEGINNING.
THAT THE ENFORCEMENT OF OTHER
MISDEMEANORS, SUCH AS PUBLIC
URINATION AND AGGRESSIVE
PANHANDLING, SHOULD ALSO BE
SCRAPPED.
>> IT DOES NOT ACTUALLY BENEFIT
PUBLIC SAFETY TO HAVE SUCH
PETTY, LOW LEVEL OFFENSES ON THE
BOOKS AND IT'S A HUGE WASTE OF
TAXPAYER DOLLARS AND RESOURCES.
>> Reporter: THE LINGERING
UNEASE IN THE TWIN CITIES IS
PALPABLE.
ALL WEEK LONG, PROTESTORS
GATHERED AT THE MINNESOTA
GOVERNOR'S MANSION.
AT THE MEMORIAL ALONG THE ROAD
WHERE PHILANDO CASTILE DIED, TWO
YOUNG WOMEN EMBRACED IN SILENCE,
PAYING THEIR RESPECTS TO A MAN
WHO HAS NOW BECOME ANOTHER
REMINDER OF THE RACIAL DIVIDE
THAT MANY BELIEVE IS MADE WIDER
BY A DISPARITY IN THE WAY POLICE
HANDLE PETTY CRIME.
>> I THINK OF THESE OFFICERS NOW
AS OTHER PEOPLE THAT ARE FORCED
TO MAKE A DECISION IN PROTECTING
US.
I'M NOT TAKING ANYTHING AWAY
FROM THE INDIVIDUALS WHO WERE
SHOT BECAUSE I DON'T KNOW WHAT
WAS HAPPENING.
BUT I HAVE SYMPATHY AND EMPATHY
FOR THE OFFICERS THAT WERE
REQUIRED TO MAKE A DECISION--
WHETHER RIGHTFULLY OR WRONG.
IF YOU'VE NEVER BEEN THERE, IT'S
KIND OF HARD TO SAY THEY WERE
WRONG.
>> Stewart: NEXT YOU ARE GOING
TO HEAR TWO VERY DIFFERENT
PERSPECTIVES ON POLICE WORK AND
HOW TWO LEADERS IN LAW
ENFORCEMENT FEEL ABOUT THEIR
WORK.
FIRST, POLICE LIEUTENANT THOMAS
GLOVER.
HE IS A 35-YEAR VETERAN OF THE
FORCE AND PRESIDENT OF THE BLACK
POLICE ASSOCIATION OF GREATER
DALLAS.
GLOVER SHARED HIS STORY JUST TWO
DAYS AFTER FIVE OF HIS FELLOW
OFFICERS WERE SHOT AND KILLED BY
A GUNMAN, ENDING A PEACEFUL
PROTEST AGAINST POLICE
BRUTALITY.
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND ANCHOR HARI
SREENIVASAN SPOKE WITH HIM IN
TEXAS.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW LONG DO YOU
THINK UNTIL THIS COMMUNITY HEALS
ITSELF FROM THIS?
>> I'D LIKE TO SAY WE'RE ON OUR
WAY TO HEALING NOW, BUT ALL IT
TAKES IS THE NEXT BAD ACTOR TO
UPSET THAT.
>> Sreenivasan: WE WENT TO SEE
LIEUTENANT THOMAS GLOVER IN
DALLAS TWO DAYS AFTER THE POLICE
SHOOTINGS.
HE'S THE PRESIDENT OF THE AREA'S
BLACK POLICE ASSOCIATION AND HAS
THE PERSPECTIVE ON WHAT IT'S
LIKE TO BE A POLICE OFFICER AND
AN AFRICAN AMERICAN.
I STARTED BY ASKING HIM IF IT'S
POSSIBLE TO WANT CRIMINAL
JUSTICE REFORM WHILE AT THE SAME
TIME VALUING THE LIFE OF EVERY
POLICE OFFICER.
>> I THINK IT IS, AS AN
INDIVIDUAL I'M THAT WAY, AS AN
AFRICAN AMERICAN MAN, IN AMERICA
WITH OVER 35 YEARS ON THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT, I AM THAT WAY.
THE MAJORITY OF THE POLICE
OFFICERS THAT I KNOW, WE ALL
WANT TO SEE BEHAVIOR THAT IS
IMPROPERLY EXHIBITED BY A POLICE
OFFICER CRIMINALIZED.
YOU HAVE TO DO YOUR JOB AS A
POLICE OFFICER, AND THEN ON THE
OTHER HAND, WHEN YOU REMOVE YOUR
UNIFORM AND BADGE, AND YOU GO
HOME, MANY OF US SPEND OUR TIMES
IN THE BLACK COMMUNITY.
THE SOCIAL ORGANIZATIONS WE TEND
TO BECOME MEMBERS OF ARE BLACK,
THE FRATERNITIES, SORORITIES,
ALUMNI ASSOCIATIONS.
SO, WE GO FROM BEING POLICE
OFFICERS WHO WORK IN A PROCESS
WHERE IT'S OUR DUTY TO DO WHAT
WE WERE SWORN TO DO, AND THAT'S
UPHOLD THE LAWS.
BUT THEN YOU HAVE SOME VERY
HEINOUS THINGS THAT HAPPEN.
I WILL NOT COMPROMISE MY
CONVICTIONS AS AN AFRICAN
AMERICAN MALE FOR THE
CONVENIENCE OF BEING A POLICE
OFFICER.
JUST CAN'T DO IT.
I HAVE REPORTED MISCONDUCT.
I HAVE REPORTED WHAT I BELIEVE
WAS TO BE EXCESSIVE FORCE.
AND I HAVE VIGOROUSLY TRIED TO
CALL OUT PEOPLE WHO OPENLY
PRACTICE WHAT I WOULD SAY WERE
DISCRIMINATORY ACTS OR RACIST
ACTS OF TREATMENT OF PEOPLE OF
COLOR.
AND SO, THAT CROSSROADS IS VERY
EVIDENT AS AN AFRICAN AMERICAN
POLICE OFFICER BECAUSE FIRST OF
ALL YOU ARE A PART OF THE
COMMUNITY.
THERE'S NOTHING I WILL EVER BE
ABLE TO DO THAT WILL DISSOLVE MY
BLACK SKIN.
NOTHING.
>> Sreenivasan: YOUR
UNWILLINGNESS TO COMPROMISE BOTH
OF THOSE IDENTITIES, HAS THAT
COST YOU IN YOUR CAREER?
>> THAT'S THE DILEMMA WE ARE
FACED WITH BECAUSE WE ARE
EXPECTED TO DO WHATEVER IS
NECESSARY TO BE THAT OFFICER OF
THE LAW, 24/7.
WE ARE ALSO EXPECTED TO BE THE
AFRICAN AMERICAN BROTHER,
FATHER, UNCLE, COUSIN, PASTOR,
DEACON, 24/7, TOO.
AND THAT MAKES IT A GRUELING
TASK.
I DO THINK THAT PEOPLE WHO ARE
DELIBERATELY BRINGING FORTH
MISCONDUCT, WHO, SO TO SPEAK,
BREAK WHAT YOU CALL CODE OF
SILENCE, I DON'T THINK THEY HAVE
THE OPPORTUNITY TO MOVE UP IN
POLICE DEPARTMENT'S THE WAY
OTHERS DO.
WHEN YOU COMPLAIN ABOUT
MISCONDUCT IN MANY INSTANCES,
YOU ARE LABELED AS A
TROUBLEMAKER, A MILITANT, YOU'RE
RADICAL.
>> Sreenivasan: THE DALLAS
POLICE DEPARTMENT KNOWS EXACTLY
WHERE YOU STAND?
>> YES, THEY KNOW.
THEY KNOW WHERE I STAND.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE ARE SO
MANY PEOPLE RIGHT NOW IN THE
COUNTRY WHO FEEL LIKE, IF I'M IN
TROUBLE THE COPS ARE NOT WHO I
CALL.
HOW DO YOU CHANGE THAT?
>> IT'S SAD THAT WE'VE GOTTEN TO
THIS POINT, BUT IT IS A FIXABLE
PROBLEM.
IT'S FIXABLE BY PEOPLE
LISTENING.
IT'S FIXABLE BY PEOPLE WHO
COMMIT THE HEINOUS ACTS BEING
PROSECUTED.
AND IT'S FIXABLE BY ALWAYS
GIVING PEOPLE A FORUM TO GO IN
AND MAKE A COMPLAINT, AND
LISTENING TO IT AND NOT
DISCOURAGING THEM.
>> Sreenivasan: ARE THE CONCERNS
OF AFRICAN AMERICAN COMMUNITIES
IN THE UNITED STATES RIGHT NOW
AGAINST POLICE DEPARTMENTS AND
HOW THE POLICE OR TREATING THEM,
ARE THEY LEGITIMATE?
>> I DEFINITELY BELIEVE THAT THE
CONCERNS ARE TOTALLY LEGITIMATE.
110%.
THE CONCERNS OF MY COMMUNITY
OUGHT TO BE THE CONCERNS OF
MINE.
IT DOESN'T SAY THAT I HAVE TO
AGREE WITH EVERYTHING THAT'S
SAID.
DOESN'T MEAN THAT EVERYTHING
THAT IS SAID IS TRUE.
BUT YOU OWE IT TO THE COMMUNITY
TO INVESTIGATE, TO MAKE VIGOROUS
ATTEMPTS AT IDENTIFYING THE
PROBLEM.
IF I AM A MEMBER OF THE
COMMUNITY-- WHETHER IT BE BLACK,
HISPANIC, ASIAN OR WHITE-- AND I
COMPLAIN ABOUT A POLICE
BEHAVIORAL ACT THAT I SAW, THEN
WE HAVE TO DEAL WITH IT.
WE CAN'T SIDESTEP IT.
>> Stewart: AND NOW TO THE
LEADER OF THE LARGEST POLICE
FORCE IN THE UNITED STATES, A
MAN WHO HAS TO DEAL WITH ISSUES
IN HIS OWN RANKS AFTER A SERIES
OF HIGH PROFILE CASES OF POLICE
BRUTALITY IN NEW YORK CITY AND
ONGOING PROTEST THIS SUMMER.
IN AN INTERVIEW WITH CHARLIE
ROSE ON HIS PBS PROGRAM EARLIER
THIS WEEK, NEW YORK CITY POLICE
COMMISSIONER BILL BRATTON
ADDRESSED THE BLACK LIVES MATTER
MOVEMENT AND ALSO HAD STRONG
WORDS ABOUT BAD COPS.
>> FIX THE PROBLEM YOU HAVE TO
ADMIT YOU HAVE THE PROBLEM.
I THINK WE'VE BEEN VERY UP FRONT
IN AMERICAN POLICING IN
RECOGNIZING THAT WE HAVE MANY
PROBLEMS.
AMONG OUR RANKS, ARE RACISTS
BRUTAL PEOPLE ARE CRIMINALS.
AND I THINK MUCH LESS OF THAT
THAN THERE WAS WHEN I WAS FIRST
IN THE PROGRESSION, I CAN
GUARANTEE.
STILL THAT PERCENTAGE THAT ONE
OR TWO PERCENT CERTAINLY, AS
POLICE COMMISSIONER HERE IN
NEW YORK TO ADDRESS SO MUCH OF
THE BLACK LIVES MATTER MOVEMENT,
FOR EXAMPLE.
THEY HAVE TEN AREAS OF PURPOSE
THAT THEY ARE DEMANDING CHANGE.
AS I LOOK AT THOSE TEN POINTS,
THE MAJORITY WE'RE ALREADY DOING
IN ARE NEW YORK.
>> WITH BLACK LIVES MATTER YOU
HAVE NO CONCERNS WITH BLACK
LIVES MATTER THE NAME OF THE
ORGANIZATION OR THE FOCUS OF
CONCERNS.
BUT THE CONCERN I HAVE IN THE
ORGANIZATION THAT SEEKS TO
STEREOTYPE US, DEFINE US, THE
GERM THAT ALLOWS RACISM IS GROW
IS THE STEREOTYPE THE PAINTING
OF A WIDE BRUSH OF A RACE OR
COLOR OR RELIGION.
PROTESTERS CLAIMING POLICE ARE
RACISTS, ALL POLICE ARE RACISTS
THAT COPS ARE COLD BLOODED
KILLERS UP THE SAME CONSTRUCT.
>> EXACTLY.
AND TO CONTINUE THAT QUOTE FROM
MY PRESS YESTERDAY, I TALKED
ABOUT THAT WOULD BE LIKE US WITH
THE 40 MILLION BLACKS IN THIS
COUNTRY, UNFORTUNATE REALITY
THERE'S SO MUCH CRIME IN THAT
COMMUNITY, BUT THEY ARE THE
VICTIMS OF THAT CRIME.
DO WE DEFINE ALL 40 MILLION
BLACKS AS CRIMINALS BECAUSE THEY
HAVE CRIMINALS IN THEIR FLANKS
NO, WE SEEK TO FOCUS ON THOSE
WHO ARE COMMITTING THOSE ACTS.
SO, THE PROBLEM I HAVE WITH
BLACK LIVES MATTER, I DON'T HAVE
A PROBLEM WITH THEIR GOAL, IF
YOU WILL.
OR WITH EVEN THE TERM "BLACK
LIVES MATTER" THAT THEY ARE
BLACK SO THEY ARE --
>> BUT TROUBLE WITH --
WITH SOME OF THE RHETORIC
WHICH IS PAINTING WITH THAT
BROAD BRUSH 24 IDEA, OF IT'S
VERY ORIGIN TO GO AFTER THE
POLICE.
>> AS THE LAW ENFORCE.
OFFICIALS WE'VE JUST
>> Stewart: AS THE LAW
ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS WE'VE JUST
HEARD FROM KNOW SOLUTIONS TO
RACIAL INJUSTICE REQUIRE NOT
JUST A DESIRE TO CHANGE, BUT THE
ACTUAL TOOLS TO MAKE CHANGE.
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
LAUNCHED MY BROTHER'S KEEPER, A
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE INITIATIVE IN
2014 TO CREATE OPPORTUNITIES FOR
YOUNG MEN OF COLOR AND TO
ADDRESS THEIR NEEDS.
SO, WE'VE ASKED BRODERICK
JOHNSON, ASSISTANT TO THE
PRESIDENT, CABINET SECRETARY,
AND THE CHAIR OF THE MY
BROTHER'S KEEPER TASK FORCE TO
JOIN US FROM WASHINGTON D.C. TO
TELL US WHAT PROGRESS THEY'VE
MADE.
MR. JOHNSON, WHAT STREET THIS
PROGRAM PROVIDING THAT WAS
MISSING?
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR
HAVING ME ON.
MY BROTHER'S KEEPER IS PROVIDING
AN OPPORTUNITY TO MAKE
TRANSFORMATIONAL CHANGE ACROSS
THE COUNTRY AND TO DO IT BASED
ON LOOKING AT, IN A VERY
RIGOROUS WAY, THOSE POINTS IN
THE LIFE OF ALL KIDS, BUT
ESPECIALLY THE LIVES OF BOYS AND
YOUNG MEN OF COLOR TO SEE WHEN
WE CAN INTERVENE TO HAVE AN
IMPACT.
THAT WORK HAS BEEN GOING VERY
WELL, WHAT WE'RE PROUD OF IS THE
FACT THAT THERE ARE OVER 250
COMMUNITIES ACROSS THE UNITED
STATES, IN ALL 50 STATES THAT
HAVE ADOPTED PRESIDENT'S VISION
AND FRAMEWORK FOR OUR BROTHER'S
KEEPER.
>> I NOTICE QUITE A BIT OF
MENTORING IN THE PROGRAM.
>> YES.
THAT STEMS FROM THE VIEW THE
PRESIDENT HAS THAT EVERY YOUNG
PERSON NEEDS A CARING ADULT IN
HIS OR HER LIFE.
OF COURSE IN MANY, MANY AFRICAN
AMERICAN COMMUNITIES AND
HISPANIC COMMUNITIES, THOSE BOYS
AND YOUNG MEN ESPECIALLY NEED TO
HAVE A MALE FIGURE IN THEIR
LIVES.
SO, WE'VE BEEN WORKING WITH THE
NBA AND WORKING WITH THE AD
COUNCIL AND MANY OTHER GROUPS,
TO TRY TO PROVIDE AS MANY
MENTORS AS WE POSSIBLY CAN.
AND WE'VE SEEN THOUSANDS OF NEW
MENTORS TAKE UP THAT
RESPONSIBILITY.
>> IS THERE ONE PROGRAM YOU SEE
THAT YOU THINK IS REALLY A TRULY
A SUCCESS STORY?
>> YES, DETROIT.
DETROIT IS ONE OF THE PREMIERE
MY BROTHER'S KEEPER COMMUNITY IN
THAT THEY STARTED TO WORK VERY
AGGRESSIVELY FROM THE BEGINNING,
INVOLVED THE COMMUNITY, HAD VERY
SPECIFIC GOALS.
ONE THAT I'M ESPECIALLY HAPPY TO
HEAR ABOUT IS THAT THEY HAVE A
SUMMER JOBS PROGRAM, AS DO MANY
OTHER COMMUNITIES, OF COURSE.
THEY ARE PROVIDING 8,000 SUMMER
JOBS THIS SUMMER AND 2,000 OF
THOSE JOBS WILL ASSOCIATE YOUNG
PEOPLE IN DETROIT WITH THE
POLICE DEPARTMENT IN DETROIT.
CERTAINLY LOOK AT ISSUES AROUND
COMMUNITY POLICING AND TRUST AND
YOUNG PEOPLE.
THAT'S AN ESPECIALLY IMPORTANT
THING TO TAKE NOTE OF.
>> YOU BRING ME TO MY NEXT
QUESTION.
WHAT IMPACT DOES MY BROTHER'S
KEEPER HAVE ON THE RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN YOUNG BLACK MEN, YOUNG
MEN OF COLOR AND POLICE
DEPARTMENTS?
>> WELL, YOU KNOW,
FUNDAMENTALLY, THESE ISSUES AS
WE'VE BEEN TALKING ABOUT IN
TERMS OF THE POLICE AND THE
COMMUNITIES THEY SERVE,
ESPECIALLY YOUNG PEOPLE OF COLOR
COME DOWN TO TRUST.
IN MANY OF MY BROTHER'S KEEPER
COMMUNITIES, IN FACT, WE ARE
SEEING -- THEY COME FORTH WITH
THEIR OWN LOCAL IDEAS AND PLANS
AND FAMILIAR SIS, WE SEE NUMBER
OF COMMUNITIES FOCUS ON GETTING
POLICE OFFICIALS TO WORK WITH
YOUNG PEOPLE, TO DEVELOP TRUST,
TALK ABOUT CAREERS AND LAW
ENFORCEMENT.
BUT TO BREAK DOWN THE BARRIERS
OF TRUST AND FEAR THAT WE OFTEN
SEE, OF COURSE THAT LEAD TO MANY
OF THE TRAGEDIES THAT WE HAVE
SEEN LATELY.
I'D LIKE TO SAY, BUT IT'S
IMPORTANT TO GET BEYOND
ASPIRATIONS TALK ABOUT REAL
THINGS.
WE'RE VERY PROUD THAT THIS
WEEKEND, LARGEST AFRICAN
AMERICAN POLICE ORGANIZATION,
NOBLES GO TO BE ANNOUNCING A
PARTNERSHIP WITH MY BROTHER'S
KEEP TORE DIRECTLY FOCUS ON
THESE ISSUES AROUND TRUST AND
RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN POLICE
OFFICERS AND THE COMMUNITIES
THEY SERVE.
ESPECIALLY BOYS AND YOUNG MEN OF
COLOR.
>> WHAT DO YOU SAY TO FOLKS WHO
ARE SAYING, YOU KNOW WHAT, THIS
IS NOT HAPPENING FAST ENOUGH.
WE'RE NOT GETTING RESULTS FAST
ENOUGH.
>> WELL, I GUESS I WOULD SAY
THAT WE IN FACT ARE SEEING
RESULTS.
WE'RE SEEING TREMENDOUS RESULTS
ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
I'VE BEEN TRAVELING TO WHAT WE
CALL NBK COMMUNITIES ON A
REGULAR BASIS, PEOPLE ARE SO
EXCITED ABOUT THE WORK, WHAT
THEY'RE EXCITED ABOUT IS FIRST
OF ALL, THAT THIS IS IN ACCORD
WITH A VISION OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE UNITED STATES.
SECOND, THAT IS BEING BUILT TO
BE SUSTAINABLE SO THAT THIS WORK
WILL GO ON AND IT'S MAKING
TRANSFORMATIONAL CHANGE.
AND THIRD, THOUGH, THERE'S A
RECOGNITION THAT WE DIDN'T GET
INTO THESE ISSUES OVERNIGHT.
THAT THIS IS STEMMING FROM MORE
THAN JUST DECADES OF CHALLENGES
IN THIS COUNTRY AROUND RACE AND
EQUITY, BUT CENTURIES.
SO, WILL TAKE US AWHILE
CERTAINLY TO BE ABLE TO COMBAT A
LOT OF THE ISSUES, BUT THAT IF
WE CHIP AWAY, WE MAKE PROGRESS,
WE LOOK AT RESULTS, WE FOCUS ON
WHAT WORKS.
IN FACT WE ARE MAKING A
DIFFERENCE.
>> BRODERICK JOHNSON, THANK YOU
SO MUCH FOR TAKING THE TIME
TODAY.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> I JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND WHY
THE WORLD COULD BE, YOU KNOW, SO
HATEFUL, ESPECIALLY TOWARDS, YOU
KNOW, YOUNG MEN THAT LOOK LIKE
ME OVER SOMETHING THAT WE HAVE
NO CONTROL OVER.
IT'S LIKE MY SKIN COLOR IS A
CRIME, LITERALLY.
IT'S A CRIME TO BE BLACK.
I'VE GOTTEN TO THE POINT ALMOST
WHERE IT FEELS I NEVER THOUGHT
ABOUT IT LIKE THIS, BUT BEING
BLACK ALMOST FEELS LIKE A JOB.
>> Stewart: WE'VE HEARD THE
VOICES OF PROTESTERS, AND
POLICE, AND GOVERNMENT
OFFICIALS.
BUT THE CONVERSATION MANY
AMERICANS ARE HAVING OCCUPIES A
SPACE THAT BARELY EXISTED A
DECADE AGO.
SOCIAL MEDIA HAS NOT ONLY
CHANGED THE WAY WE LEARN ABOUT
TRAGEDIES, IT'S ALSO CHANGED THE
WAY WE REACT TO THEM.
WE GET INFORMATION IN REAL TIME,
SOMETIMES WE DON'T EVEN KNOW THE
MESSENGER, AND THE MESSENGER
DOESN'T KNOW US.
NEWSHOUR'S HARI SREENIVASAN
EXPLORES THE OFTEN UNFILTERED,
SOMETIMES ANGRY, AND SOMETIMES
WONDERFULLY KIND WORLD OF SHARED
INFORMATION.
>> Sreenivasan: ALTON STERLING
STRUGGLING BENEATH POLICE, SHOT
DEAD.
THE ENTIRE SCENE CAPTURED ON
NEARBY CELL PHONES.
DIAMOND REYNOLDS, SITTING IN THE
PASSENGER SEAT OF A CAR
BROADCASTING LIVE ON FACEBOOK,
JUST AFTER POLICE SHOT HER
BOYFRIEND PHILANDO CASTILE.
SHE CALMLY NARRATES AS THE
OFFICER STILL HAD HIS GUN DRAWN
JUST OUTSIDE THE CAR WINDOW.
>> I TOLD HIM NOT TO REACH FOR
IT.!
I TOLD HIM TO GET HIS HAND OPEN!
>> YOU TOLD HIM TO GET HIS I.D.,
SIR, HIS DRIVER'S LICENSE.
PLEASE DON'T TELL ME MY
BOYFRIEND JUST WENT LIKE THAT.
>> Sreenivasan: THE NEXT DAY,
REPORTS OF THE SHOOTINGS AT THE
PROTEST IN DALLAS QUICKLY SPREAD
ACROSS SOCIAL MEDIA.
A POST ON TWITTER READ, "POLICE
HAVE STOPPED THE PROTEST.
SHOTS HAVE BEEN FIRED."
AND CELL PHONE VIDEOS FOUND
THEIR WAY ONTO TV.
>> THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT VIDEO
THAT TRANSFORMS AN EVENT.
THAT TRANSFORMS OUR
UNDERSTANDING OF AN EVENT.
>> Sreenivasan: DAVID FOLKENFLIK
IS THE MEDIA CORRESPONDENT FOR
NATIONAL PUBLIC RADIO.
HE SAYS THESE VIDEOS QUICKLY
TAKE ON NATIONAL SIGNIFICANCE.
>> YOU GET A LOT OF
CONVERSATION, PEOPLE TRYING TO
FIGURE OUT WHAT IS GOING ON.
AND YOU ALSO SEE A LOT OF ANGER,
OF HURT, OF PAIN, OF ANGUISH, OF
FAIRLY UNVARNISHED EMOTIONS
COURSING THROUGH YOUR STREAMS ON
TWITTER, ON FACEBOOK, ON OTHER
SOCIAL MEDIA PLATFORMS.
>> Sreenivasan: THE HASHTAG
BLACK LIVES MATTER BEGAN
TRENDING ONLINE AS IT HAS AFTER
SO MANY SUCH VIDEOS, BUT THIS
TIME IT BEGAN MOBILIZING PEOPLE
ON THE STREETS IN THE REAL
WORLD.
>> BLACK LIVES MATTER!
>> Sreenivasan: THE PROTESTS
WERE RECORDED AND IN TURN
APPEARED BACK ONLINE.
BUT YOU MIGHT HAVE MISSED THEM
UNLESS YOU OR YOUR FRIENDS WERE
ALREADY FOLLOWING THE
CONVERSATION OR PAYING ATTENTION
TO EXCESSIVE USES OF FORCE.
>> HANDS UP, DON'T SHOOT.
HANDS UP, DON'T SHOOT.
>> MUCH OF THAT SAME KIND OF
POLARIZATION IS HAPPENING
ONLINE.
SO WE STILL HAVE THAT ECHO
CHAMBER WE GET OUR NEWS IN THE
PLACE THAT WE LIKE TO GET OUR
NEWS TO TELL US WE WHAT WE WANT
TO HEAR.
>> Sreenivasan: CHARLTON
McILWAIN, A PROFESSOR OF MEDIA,
CULTURE AND COMMUNICATION AT NEW
YORK UNIVERSITY, SAYS THE TENOR
OF THE CONVERSATION SHIFTED
AFTER THE SHOOTINGS OF POLICE
OFFICERS IN DALLAS.
>> AND I THINK WHEN DALLAS
HAPPENED, WHAT YOU START TO SEE
IS THAT CONVERSATION COMPLETELY
TURN TO COPS AS THE PRIMARY
VICTIMS AND THEN FOLKS ON THE
OTHER SIDE AS THE VILLAINS,
REALLY.
>> Sreenivasan: ANGRY TWEETS
DENOUNCING THE BLACK LIVES
MATTER MOVEMENT SPREAD QUICKLY
ONLINE.
WITH MESSAGES LIKE, "CLEARLY THE
RHETORIC OF BLACK LIVES MATTERS
ENCOURAGED THE SNIPER THAT SHOT
DALLAS POLICE OFFICERS," AND
"YOU DID THIS OBAMA, YOU DID
THIS LIBERALS, YOU DID THIS
BLACK LIVES MATTER."
AT THE SAME TIME, ANTI-COP
MESSAGES LIKE, "DON'T FEEL BAD
FOR THOSE PIGS," AND "I'M GLAD
11 COPS WERE SHOT.
THEY NEED TO LEARN HOW WE FEEL."
>> THERE IS A DIN AND A
CACOPHONY THAT EMERGES.
IT'S LOUD, IT'S CLANGING, IT IS
OFTEN VERY MUCH IN CONFLICT,
PEOPLE AGREEING WITH EACH OTHER,
KIND OF PUMPING ONE ANOTHER UP.
>> AND THEN YOU JUST END UP IN A
POLARIZED CONVERSATION WHERE NO
ONE'S GOING TO LISTEN TO EACH
OTHER AND EVERYONE IS JUST GOING
TO GET MORE ANGRY.
>> Sreenivasan: WHILE PARTS OF
SOCIAL MEDIA HIGHLIGHTED THE
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN PEOPLE,
THESE SAME PLATFORMS BECAME THE
SPACE FOR AN OUTPOURING OF
SUPPORT TO A GRIEVING NATION.
>> I APPRECIATE YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: IMAGES OF PEOPLE
HUGGING DALLAS LAW ENFORCEMENT,
WERE VIEWED MORE THAN 36 MILLION
TIMES.
THE VIDEO OF A DALLAS POLICE
OFFICER THE DAY AFTER THE
ATTACK GOT MORE THAN SEVEN
MILLION VIEWS.
>> I LOVE YOU.
>> I LOVE YOU, TOO.
>> Sreenivasan: HE ALSO HAD THIS
MESSAGE.
>> ALWAYS REMEMBER, I REFUSE TO
SEE HATE LIVE WHILE LOVE DIES.
I REFUSE TO SEE HATE LIVE WHILE
LOVE DIES.
>> Sreenivasan: CHARLTON
McILWAIN SAYS THESE MOMENTS THAT
CONNECT PEOPLE HAVE AN IMPORTANT
PLACE IN THE NATIONAL
CONVERSATION.
>> I THINK THEY HELP KIND OF RE-
HUMANIZE THE SITUATION.
THEY HELP SORT OF BECOME A KIND
OF COUNTER-NARRATIVE THAT SAYS
LOOK WE DON'T HAVE TO SEE
PROTESTERS AND COPS AS POLAR
ENDS OF A CONVERSATION OR
ANTAGONISTIC PARTIES WITH
ANTAGONISTIC INTERESTS.
>> Stewart: FOLLOW OUR
CONTINUING COVERAGE OF ISSUES OF
RACE AND POLICING IN THE UNITED
STATES.
VISIT US ONLINE AT
pbs.org/newshour.
AND JOIN THE CONVERSATION ON
TWITTER.
TWEET US AT NEWSHOUR AND USE THE
HASHTAG #AMERICABLACKANDBLUEPBS.
DISCUSSIONS ABOUT VIOLENCE ARE
NOT NEW AT PBS.
AFTER FERGUSON, AFTER
CHARLESTON, AND IN THE WAKE OF
THE ELEMENTARY SCHOOL SHOOTING
IN NEWTOWN, CONNECTICUT, PBS
BROADCAST AND STREAMED TOWN
HALLS AND SPECIAL REPORTS TO
HELP START CONVERSATIONS.
HERE'S NEWSHOUR ANCHOR GWEN
IFILL FROM A PBS TOWN HALL
DISCUSSION IN ST. LOUIS,
MISSOURI, FOLLOWING THE SHOOTING
OF MICHAEL BROWN IN 2014.
>> Ifill: I WANT TO START BY
TALKING TO REVEREND TRACY
BLACKMAN IS THE PASTOR OF CHRIST
THE KING UNITED CHURCH OF
CHRIST.
WHY DON'T YOU JOIN ME AND TALK
TO ME A LITTLE BIT ABOUT THE
INTERESTING QUESTIONS PEOPLE
HAVE ABOUT YOU WHO ARE IN THE
MIDDLE OF IT ALL.
IS HOW MUCH IT CHANGED YOU.
>> I DON'T THINK THAT ANY OF US
WILL EVER BE THE SAME BECAUSE OF
FERGUSON.
I PASS FOR A CHURCH TIN
FLORISTON TO SEE WHAT WAS
HAPPENING THERE IT DOESN'T JUST
RESONATE WITH ME AS A PASTOR BUT
AS A MOTHER.
I HAVE TWO BLACK SONS WHO ARE IN
THEIR 20s.
SO I KNOW WHAT IT FEELS LIKE TO
BE TARGETED, I KNOW WHAT IT
FEELS LIKE NOT TO BE HEARD.
AS A PROFESSIONAL IN THIS CITY,
I ALSO TRAVEL BETWEEN BOTH
SIDES, JUST LIKE THERE ARE TWO
FERGUSONS, THERE ARE TWO
ST. LOUISES AND TWO AMERICAS I
TRAVEL BETWEEN BOTH OF THEM.
SO, TO SEE THE GREAT CHASM THAT
EXISTS JUST BETWEEN A FEW
TRAFFIC LIGHTS THAT CHANGE THE
PERCEPTION OF EVERYTHING THAT
HAPPENS TO YOU.
BEFORE MIKE BROWN.
FOR ALL OF MY LIFE, FOR ALL OF
MY LIFE, FOR ALL OF MY
CHILDRENS' LIVES.
FOR ALL OF MY PARENTS' LIVES
BEFORE ME.
>> Ifill: THANK YOU.
>>
>> Stewart: THAT WAS ALMOST TWO
YEARS AGO AFTER FERGUSON.
BUT FOR MANY AFRICAN AMERICAN
PARENTS, THEIR FEARS HAVE NOT
CHANGED.
HAVING TO TALK TO YOUR CHILD
ABOUT RACE IS SOMETHING ALL
PARENTS OF COLOR KNOW THEY MUST
DO.
AN UPCOMING PBS DOCUMENTARY WILL
EXAMINE HOW PARENTS PREPARE
THEIR CHILDREN TO INTERACT WITH
THE POLICE BY SITTING DOWN FOR
"THE TALK."
IN THIS EXCERPT, YOU'LL MEET TWO
WOMEN DEALING WITH THE REALITY
OF RAISING AFRICAN AMERICAN BOYS
IN AMERICA.
THAT WE CAN'T
LET OUR SONS OUT OF OUR FRONT
DOORS.
WITHOUT GIVING THEM INSTRUCTIONS
ON HOW TO COME BACK ALIVE.
WE HAVE DONE 16 OF THESE TALKS
AROUND THE ST. LOUIS REGION.
THE PANEL HAS TRAVELED HERE FROM
MEMPHIS TO BROADEN THE COMMUNITY
AND MAKE YOU A PARTED OF
HEALING, WHAT IS GOING SO WRONG
IN AMERICA RIGHT NOW.
>> I MOVED WITH MY SON INTO AN
ALL-WHITE COMMUNITY.
I DID NOT EXPECT HIM TO EVER BE
TROUBLE.
BUT THEY DON'T HAVE TO BE.
THEY DON'T HAVE TO DO ANYTHING,
WHICH IS THE PROBLEM.
AND SO WHEN A POLICE OFFICER
PULLED HIM OVER I JUST HAPPENED
TO BE WITH HIM.
I HEARD SOMETHING IN MY SON'S
VOICE I DID NOT REALIZE EXISTED.
HE KNEW HE HAD NOT DONE ANYTHING
WRONG.
I HEARD AN ANGER.
HE WASN'T DISRESPECTFUL.
MY SON KEPT ASKING HIM, WHAT DID
I DO.
AND I HAVE ABSOLUTELY NO DOUBT
IN MY MIND THAT HAD I NOT BEEN
THERE THAT SITUATION WOULD HAVE
ESCALATED.
>> THAT IS -- CHRISTIE CREATED
CREATING CONVERSATIONS, GETTING
PARTICIPATED IN MEMPHIS SHE'S A
MINISTER AND A MOTHER WHO WILL
SOON HAVE THE TALK WITH HER TWO
SONS.
I HOPE I NEVER FORGET THE TIME
WHEN I WAS PREGNANT WITH OUR
FIRST SON.
MY HUSBAND AND I WERE SO
EXCITED, WE WERE WALKING INTO
THE DOCTOR'S OFFICE, BUT I
STOPPED IN MY TRACKS, I SEE A
YOUNG AFRICAN AMERICAN ABOUT 12
OR 13 YEARS OLD.
HIS HANDS WERE IN HANDCUFFS AND
HIS FEET WERE SHACKLED.
AND THAT JUST BROKE MY HEART
WIDE OPEN, TO HAVE A BLACK BOY
GROWING INSIDE OF MY BODY, THAT
WAS SORT OF A FIRST AWAKENING
FOR ME ABOUT WHAT IT MIGHT MEAN
TO RAISE A BLACK BOY IN THE
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
>> FOR SO MANY WHITE PEOPLE,
BECAUSE OF HAVING THE PRIVILEGE
OF WHITE SKIN, WHICH AFFORDS
THEM THE OPPORTUNITY TO BE GIVEN
THE BENEFIT OF THE DOUBT NOT THE
AUTOMATICALLY ASSUMED TO BE
SUSPICIOUS OR GUILTY OR UP TO NO
GOOD.
THEY ARE UNAWARE OF THE WAYS IN
WHICH BLACK PEOPLE AND PEOPLE OF
COLOR ARE AT FIRST GLANCE
PERCEIVED IN THAT WAY.
IT'S NOT ABOUT BEING COLOR
BLIND, BUT RATHER OUR SONS
DEMAND TO BE TREATED AS FULL
HUMAN BEINGS WHO ARE WORTHY OF
DIGNITY AND RESPECT.
SO, AS MY CHILDREN ARE GETTING
OLDER, GRADUALLY WE'RE GOING TO
HAVE THESE TALKS WITH THEM,
BECAUSE YOU ARE AN AFRICAN
AMERICAN, PEOPLE MIGHT NOT BE
WILLING TO SEE YOU AS JUST A
CHILD, OR TO SEE YOU AS JUST A
TEENAGER.
BUT MIGHT FIRST BELIEVE THAT YOU
ARE UP TO SOMETHING NO GOOD AND
NOT WILLING TO GIVE YOU THE
BENEFIT OF THE DOUBT.
MY HUSBAND AND ARE I ARE IN THAT
SPACE NOW OF TRYING TO FIGURE
OUT WHEN WE START HAVING THOSE
CONVERSATIONS.
>> Stewart: PARENTS SAY THEY
HAVE TO PREPARE THEIR CHILDREN
FOR THE POSSIBILITY THAT AN
ENCOUNTER WITH THE POLICE COULD
GO WRONG.
BUT IT COULD ALSO GO WRONG FOR
THE OFFICERS WHO HAVE TO PREPARE
FOR DANGER AND FACE THEIR OWN
FEARS.
IN THIS EXCERPT FROM THE
DOCUMENTARY, WE GET A REVEALING
LOOK AT HOW POLICE RECRUITS AT
SOUTH CAROLINA'S TRAINING
ACADEMY LEARN THAT A SPLIT
SECOND MISCALCULATION, AN HONEST
MISTAKE, OR A BRIEF FLASH OF
BIAS CAN ESCALATE A ROUTINE CALL
INTO A DEADLY CONFRONTATION.
>> UNIT ONE.
INITIATING A TRAFFIC STOP ON A
BLACK FOUR-DOOR SEDAN LICENSE
PLATE, WE'RE ON MAIN --
>> TRAFFIC STOPS ARE REALLY
DANGEROUS.
WE DON'T KNOW WHAT WE'RE GETTING
INTO.
WE HAVE SECONDS, MAYBE A MINUTE
TO EVALUATE A SITUATION BASED ON
THE VIEW THROUGH A BACK WINDOW
TO GATHER INFORMATION ON THE
PERSON THAT WE'RE STOPPING.
>> HOW ARE YOU FEELING TODAY,
ARE YOU ALL RIGHT?
>> DOING GOOD.
DOING GOOD.
>> YEAH, I GET REAL NERVOUS.
>> NO SUCH THING AS ROUTINE
TRAFFIC STOP.
EVERYONE IS DIFFERENT, YOUR
ADRENALINE GOES, WHAT IS GOING
ON, WHAT'S HAPPENING?
THE 80-YEAR-OLD LADY WHO JUST
DOESN'T KNOW THAT SHE RAN A STOP
SIGN.
AN ARMED ROBBERY SUSPECT.
YOU DON'T KNOW.
>> AND SOMETIMES IT TAKES A TURN
FOR THE WORSE.
THE VIDEO IS A VIDEO THAT WE USE
IN TRAINING HERE DURING OUR
TRAFFIC STOP TRAINING IN WEEK
NINE.
HE WAS A TROOPER THAT WAS KILLED
IN THE LINE OF DUTY HERE IN
SOUTH CAROLINA.
>> GOOD TO GO.
>> THANK YOU, SIR.
>> WE USE THAT VIDEO BECAUSE IT
SHOWS A LOT OF TACTICAL ERRORS.
WHEN THE SUSPECT GETS OUT OF THE
VEHICLE.
WE NEED TO GET THEM TO THE REAR
OF THE VEHICLE AND CONTROL HIS
MOVEMENT WHILE HE'S OUTSIDE THE
VEHICLE.
AND THAT'S ONE OF THE THINGS
MARK DIDN'T DO.
>> IT WAS TACTICAL ERRORS THAT
WE SEE THAT ENDED UP COSTING
MARK HIS LIFE.
>> IT'S A DANGEROUS JOB, NO
IFs, ANDs OR BUTs ABOUT
IT.
ASPECTS OF THIS JOB THAT WILL
PUT POLICE OFFICERS IN HARM'S
WAY.
>> I DON'T KNOW, MAN.
>> GUN!
GUN!
>> DON'T MOVE.
>> ALMOST EVERYBODY IS CARRYING
A GUN NOW.
AND THEY KNOW THAT EACH TIME
THEY ENCOUNTER SOMEBODY.
>> WHEN HE CAME INTO THIS
BUSINESS IN 1979 I WAS WORKING
NARCOTICS, I WAS WORKING
UNDERCOVER DOING STREET-LEVEL
BUYS, NOBODY I EVER BOUGHT
HARDLY HAD A GUN BACK THEN.
I DIDN'T EVEN COUNT ON PEOPLE
WITH GUNS.
TODAY, EVERYBODY HAS GOT A GUN.
>> AM I THE ONLY --
>> NO.
>> WHENEVER YOU HOLLER "GUN" IT
CAME OUT AND YOU GUYS WERE
STRAIGHT LINE, ALL RIGHT.
IT TOOK YOU A SECOND TO REALIZE
IT BECAUSE IT'S LIKE -- TUNNEL
VISION.
AND IT COMES BACK UP AND YOU'RE
LIKE, OWE -- THAT'S MY PARTNER.
>> COME ON, STEP BACK OVER HERE.
I DON'T WANT TO DO MY SEARCH
RIGHT HERE.
I'M DOING IT RIGHT THERE ON
CAMERA.
ALWAYS ON CAMERA.
ALWAYS, ALWAYS, ALWAYS ON
CAMERA.
THAT VIDEO CAMERA IS TO COVER
YOUR ASS.
>> I CAN SEE WHERE ANYBODY THAT
IS PULLED OVER WITH BE IN PERIL.
THAT IS A SCARY SITUATION FOR
ANYBODY.
I'VE BEEN PULLED OVER, IT IS
VERY SCARY TO BE DRIVING DOWN
THE ROAD AND HAVE BLUE LIGHTS
AND SIRENS LIGHT UP IN YOUR
MIRROR.
>> I BURY MY HEAD IN THE SAND
THINK WE DON'T HAVE RACISM IN
LAW ENFORCE; IT DOES EXIST.
IT EXISTS ALL OVER THE UNITED
STATES.
BUT THAT DOESN'T MEAN THAT WE
CAN'T MAKE EFFORTS TO ELIMINATE
RACISM.
>> IS JUST THAT, CULTURAL
DIVERSITY, WE TALK ABOUT
EVERYBODY.
PEOPLE'S PREJUDICES, THEIR
BELIEFS, THEIR THOUGHT PROCESS.
WE WANT TO, IF ANYTHING ELSE GET
THEM TO THINK OUTSIDE OF THE BOX
BOX.
STEM UP OUTSIDE YOUR COMFORT
ZONE OFTENTIMES EVERYONE HAS A
BIAS.
BUT A LOT OF TIMES, IT'S NOTHING
THAT THEY'RE TRYING TO BE UGLY
ABOUT.
IT'S JUST THAT'S HOW I WAS
RAISED I DON'T KNOW ANY
DIFFERENT.
I'VE HEARD STUDENTS SAY, I
DIDN'T GROW UP AROUND ANYONE
WHITE OR BLACK.
>> IT'S DECISION MAKING.
WHAT YOU HAVE IS SCENARIOS, I'LL
SHOW YOU ONE HERE SO YOU CAN SEE
WHAT IT LOOKS LIKE.
YOU GOT TO TREAT IT LIKE THE
REAL WORLD.
PUT YOURSELF IN THAT SCARECROW.
OKAY N HERE WE GO.
>> WHERE IS HE?
WHERE IS HE AT?
>> GET OUT!
>> DROP THE GUN!
DROP THE GUN!
I NEED TO YOU DROP THE KNIFE!
>> SPEND ALL HIS MONEY ON BEER,
NOT OUR KIDS --
>> I UNDERSTAND!
JUST DROP THE KNIFE SO WE CAN
TALK ABOUT IT.
THANK YOU.
>> I UNDERSTAND.
>> YOU RECOGNIZE THIS, WHAT DOES
SHE WANT TO DO?
>> SHE WANTS --
YOU RECOGNIZE THAT RIGHT AWAY
AWAY.
WHAT THE --
>> DROP THE KNIFE!
>> HAVE HER DROP THE KNIFE THEN
WE CAN TALK.
THAT'S WHAT WE GOT TO D. SHE'S
GOT TO DROP THE KNIFE BEFORE WE
CAN TALK.
EXCELLENT.
>> I'M NOT GOING TO CHANGE IT.
>> I UNDERSTAND.
JUST DROP THE KNIFE SO WE CAN
TALK ABOUT IT.
THANK YOU.
BAM, SHOT, RIGHT THERE.
WHAT IF HE HAD DONE THAT.
>> THAT WOULDN'T HAVE BEEN GOOD.
>> IN ORDER FOR OFFICER TO
UTILIZE DEADLY FORCE, THE
WEAPON, THEY HAVE TO BE
JUSTIFIED.
THEY HAVE TO HAVE ALL THE
ELEMENTS PRESENT, THE
OPPORTUNITY IN JEOPARDY.
>> YOU SAW A FLASH COMING OUT
FROM BEHIND HER BACK.
>> I DID.
>> DID YOU ALL SEE HIM?
HE RELAXED.
OH, MAN, CAME BACK OUT WITH THAT
BOTTLE RIGHT THERE THAT WOULD BE
THAT QUARTER SECOND YOU HAD TO
MAKE A DECISION, HOLY CRAP IS
THAT A BOTTLE OR A GUN?
>> THERE'S NO AIMING FOR THE
HAND LIKE IN THE MOVIES.
OR TRYING TO SHOOT SOMEONE IN
THE LEG LIKE YOU SEE IN THE
MOVIES.
THAT DOESN'T HAPPEN.
ONLY THE SKILL, HIGHLY TRAINED
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS DO THAT
TYPE OF THING.
THE REGULAR OFFICER ON THE
STREET WITH JUST HANDGUN, THEY
ARE GOING TO SHOOT FOR CENTER
MASS OF THE TARGET THAT THEY
HAVE AVAILABLE AND THEY ARE
SHOOTING TO ELIMINATE THE
THREAT.
>> WE ON'T WANT TO DO ANYTHING
LIKE THAT.
NONE MUCH US DO.
OFTENTIMES WE GOT TO BE MORE
REACTIVE THAN PRO-ACTIVE
CERTAINLY IN THIS TYPE OF
SITUATION.
I GOT TO SEE WHAT THAT IS, SEE
WHAT IS GOING ON WITH THAT
THING.
GET THE WHOLE STORY.
DON'T ASSUME THAT SOMETHING IS
WHAT IT APPEARED TO BE.
VERY SELDOM IS.
>> WE LOOK TRYING TO REESTABLISH
PEACE AND WE'RE TRYING TO
ACTUALLY BUILD THE RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN POLICE AND COMMUNITY,
BUT YET HERE WE ARE OUT HERE
SHOOTING THE POLICE.
WE CAN'T DO.
THAT WE HAVE TO BE ABLE TO DEAL
WITH THE PROCESS SO IT WAS A
STEP BACK.
>> Stewart: WHILE PUNDITS AND
CABLE NEWS GRAPHICS CLAIM WE ARE
A NATION DIVIDED, THE REALITY IS
WE ARE A NATION OF DIVERSE
OPINIONS AND EXPERIENCES, BUT
WE'RE NOT NECESSARILY ALWAYS AT
ODDS.
WE'VE INVITED THREE PEOPLE, WITH
THREE DIFFERENT PERSPECTIVES, TO
SHARE THEIR THOUGHTS AND DISCUSS
HOW WE MIGHT FIND COMMON GROUND
ON POLICING, PROTEST AND RACE.
JOINING ME HERE IN THE STUDIO
ARE MONIFA BANDELE SENIOR
CAMPAIGN DIRECTOR OF
moms-rising.org, JOURNALIST IAN
TUTTLE, A WRITER AND A FELLOW AT
THE NATIONAL REVIEW, AND MARQUEZ
CLAXTON, DIRECTOR OF THE BLACK
LAW ENFORCEMENT ALLIANCE AND A
RETIRED NEW YORK POLICE
DETECTIVE.
THANKS TO ALL OF YOU FOR BEING
HERE.
WE'LL USE FIRST NAMES FOR THIS
CONVERSATION.
MONIFA, YOU HELPED START COP
WATCH IN 1999, TRAINED TEAMS ALL
AROUND ABOUT HOW TO MONITOR THE
POLICE.
I WANT TO KNOW FROM YOU, WHAT
WAS THE HARDEST THING TO GET
YOUR HEAD AROUND AFTER THE
EVENTS THAT HAPPENED IN TEXAS,
MINNEAPOLIS AND IN LOUISIANA.
>> IT WAS ALMOST SURREAL WHEN WE
FIRST STARTED DOING COP WATCH
AND VIDEOTAPING POLICE, CELL
PHONES DIDN'T EXIST, VIRAL VIDEO
WAS NOT AROUND.
THERE WASN'T EVEN FACEBOOK IN
1999.
SO, THIS IDEA THAT PEOPLE COULD
TAKE VIDEO AND IT COULD GO VIRAL
AND THEN IT COULD BE RAPID
RESPONSE TO INCIDENCE IN THE WAY
IT TOOK A LONG TIME BEFORE.
ONE IS JUST LIKE REALLY POWERFUL
THAT THIS WAY OF ACTIVISM HAS
REALLY DEVELOPED AND EXPLODED IN
MANY WAYS AS WE'VE SEEN IN THESE
CITIES.
THE OTHER PIECE I THOUGHT ABOUT
WAS THIS NEW TALK NOW THAT WE
HAVE WITH OUR CHILDREN AS
PARENTS.
WHICH IS ABOUT WATCHING VIDEOS
OVER AND OVER.
I FOUND MYSELF EACH MORNING WHEN
THOSE VIDEOS CAME OUT WAS THE
KILLING OF THE MAN IN LOUISIANA
AND IN MINNESOTA, WANTED TO
HURRY UP GET TO MY CHILDREN SAY
THERE'S A VIDEO OUT, IT WILL BE
ON SNAPCHAT, IN YOUR NEWS FEED
BUT YOU NEED TO PREPARE YOURSELF
IN A WAY THAT WE DIDN'T
EXPERIENCE WHEN WE WERE YOUNGER,
BECAUSE IT'S ALMOST
RETRAUMATIZING.
>> AS A RETIRED POLICE OFFICER,
WHAT WAS HARD TO RECONCILE FOR
YOU AFTER THE EVENTS OF THE PAST
TWO WEEKS?
>> I TELL YOU, IT WASN'T -- NOT
DIFFICULT TO RECONCILE.
THEY ARE -- I EXPECT THEM AT
THIS POINT GIVEN THE TRAGIC
HISTORY OF EVENTS, GIVEN THE
TRAGIC HISTORY OF POOR POLICE
COMMUNITY RELATIONS GIVEN THE
FACT THAT I REALIZE THAT WE LIVE
IN A WORLD WE HAVE CRAZY FOLK
OUT THERE.
AND SOMETIMES THOSE CRAZY PEOPLE
WILL ENGAGE IN ALL TYPES OF
VIOLENT ACTS.
AND EVEN SOMETIMES AGAINST
AUTHORITY OR GOVERNMENT, FOR
EXAMPLE.
SO, THERE IS NOTHING SHOCKING.
IT IS, HOWEVER, QUITE TRAUMATIC
AS MONIFA END DIETED WATCH,
OBSERVE THESE VIDEOS OVER AND
OVER AGAIN AND TRAUMATIC TO HAVE
TO LIVE THROUGH, EXPLAIN,
RATIONALIZE MANY OF THE EVENTS
THAT THE VIDEOS DEPICT.
>> IAN, YOU'RE A YOUNG GUY, YOU
WRITE FOR SELF IDENTIFIED
CONSERVATIVE PUBLICATION, WHAT
ABOUT THE EVENTS 69 PAST TWO
WEEKS STRUCK A CHORD WITH YOU?
>> NONE OF THESE EVENTS SEEM
PARTICULARLY UNEXPECTED.
GIVEN WHAT WE'VE SEEN OVER THE
PAST TWO YEARS.
UNFORTUNATELY.
UNFORTUNATELY ALSO I THINK WE'VE
BEEN UNWILLING TO SORT OF
DISAGGREGATE WHAT ARE TO A
CERTAIN EXTENT DIFFERENT EVENTS,
THE NEED TO BE SORT OF PROPERLY
CONTEXTUALIZEED, IN THE DEATHS WE
HAVE A CERTAIN TYPE OF VIOLENCE
AND AS MOW FEE FA POINTS OUT WE
HAVE INSTANT ACCESS TO THAT --
TO THE FLIP SIDE OF
ACCOUNTABILITY IS SNAP JUDGMENT.
WHICH AS WE SAW IN THE CASE OF
MICHAEL BROWN OR READY GREY,
SOME OF THESE OTHER CASES, MANY
OF KNOWS SNAP JUDGMENTS TURN OUT
TO BE WRONG, TURN OUT TO BE
UNJUSTIFIABLE.
WHERE AS IN DALLAS WE HAD VERY
OBVIOUS CASE OF WHAT WAS
EFFECTIVELY DOMESTIC TERROR.
SO, IT'S SIMPLY IMPORTANT IN THE
CONTEXT OF SEVERAL DIFFERENT
TRAGEDIES TO ALSO BE
DIFFERENTIATING THE
CIRCUMSTANCES SURROUNDING THESE
EVENTS AND BY DOING THAT, I
THINK WE CAN FIGURE OUT MORE
CONSTRUCTIVE WAYS TO ADDRESS ALL
OF THEM.
>> WE OUGHT TO KEEP IN CONTEXT,
KEEP IN HISTORICAL CONTEXT
OFTENTIMES, AS WAS INDICATED THE
REACTION, THE RESPONSE, SOME
TIMES VISCERAL RESPONSE, IS NOT
OF RUSH TO JUDGMENT, PER SE.
BUT IT IS A REACTION TO WHAT
PEOPLE SEE AND OBSERVE AND
RECOGNIZE TO BE A SYSTEM THAT IS
IN NEED OF REFORM.
AND THAT THERE ARE INDIVIDUALS
OUT THERE WHO ACT, UNDER THE
COLOR OF LAW, PERPETRATE CERTAIN
OFFENSES AGAINST CIVILIAN
POPULATION, AT LEAST TO THEIR
GUESS.
THEN THE ARGUMENT BECOMES,
INSTEAD OF WHAT CAUSED THIS, HOW
DID THIS HAPPEN, WAS IT
AVOIDABLE.
IT NOW BECOMES A SITUATION WHERE
PEOPLE SAY, WAS IT JUSTIFIED OR
NOT JUSTIFIED.
>> YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT PEOPLE
WHO REACT IMMEDIATELY.
THINK ABOUT PEOPLE WHO REALLY
AREN'T THAT INTERESTED,
OBVIOUSLY PEOPLE ARE INTERESTED
ABOUT THE LOSS OF LIFE AND FEEL
PAIN AND SADNESS ABOUT THAT,
BUT, YOU KNOW WHAT, REALLY ARE
THAN DEEPLY INVOLVED AS
ACTIVISTS ARE.
DOESN'T AFFECT THEIR DAILY
LIVES, DOESN'T COME TO THEIR
FRONT DOOR, AREN'T REALLY
INTERESTED IN POLICE REFORM.
WHAT WOULD YOU SAY TO THOSE
PEOPLE, THIS IS JUST A HEADLINE
THEY READ IN THE NEWS THEN MOVE
ON WITH THE REST OF THEIR LIVES.
>> IT'S IMPORTANT THAT WE STEP
IN OTHER PEOPLE'S SHOES.
THAT'S THE ONLY WAY THAT WE'RE
GOING TO COME UP WITH A
COLLECTIVE SOLUTION.
THAT'S THE ONLY WAY WE'RE GOING
TO BE ABLE TO ACTUAL LIES THE
AFFIRMATION THAT BLACK LIVES
MATTER.
EVERYONE HAS TO STEP OUTSIDE OF
THEIR OWN EXPERIENCE AND TAKE A
LOOK AT THIS.
BECAUSE THERE ARE PEOPLE RIGHT
NEXT TO THEM THAT CAN'T STEP OUT
OF THE SITUATION.
>> YOU TALK ABOUT PEOPLE WHO ARE
REMOVED FROM THIS SITUATION.
WHAT YOU'RE REALLY TALKING ABOUT
IS WHITE PEOPLE.
BLACK PEOPLE CAN'T AFFORD TO BE
TOTALLY REMOVED FROM THE
SITUATION.
WE'VE HEARD COUNTLESS STORIES NO
MATTER THE SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS,
NO MATTER WHERE YOU LIVE, WHO
YOU ARE, THIS IS YOUR REALITY
YOU HAVE TO DEAL WITH THIS,
ADDRESS IT AT SOME POINT.
JUST TO BE CLEAR, BLACK FOLK
CAN'T AFFORD TO BE READ MOVED
FROM THE SITUATION AT ANY LEVEL.
>> IAN, YOU'VE WRITTEN ABOUT
BLACK LIVES MATTER AND
COMPLIMENTARY ABOUT SOME PARTS
OF THE MOVEMENT AND CRITICISMS.
TELL ME ONE THING YOU THINK OF
THE MOVEMENT IS REALLY
ACCOMPLISHING THAT'S POSITIVE
AND SOMETHING ABOUT THE MOVEMENT
THAT TROUBLES YOU.
>> I THINK MONIFA LAID OUT WHAT
SEEMS LIKE PHILOSOPHICAL COMMON
GROUND, THE BLACK LIVES MATTER
IN MY READING IS PREDICATED ON
THIS SORT OF IMAGINATIVE ACT OF
COMPASSION WHICH IS STEP OUT OF
YOURSELF, PEOPLE WHO DON'T
UNDERSTAND THE PAIN AND THE FEAR
THAT DOES EXIST IN THE BLACK
COMMUNITY.
STEP OUT OF YOUR LIVES AND INTO
THAT POSITION AND TRY TO
UNDERSTAND IT.
I THINK THAT'S A WAY -- THAT'S
CAN BE VERY POWERFUL WAY TO
DISSOLVE BARRIERS.
WHAT I'M CRITICAL OF IS THAT A
LOT OF BLACK LIVES MATTER
ACTIVIST DON'T SEEM TO BE
WILLING TO DO THAT FOR LAW
ENFORCEMENT.
UPLOOK AT A SITUATION LIKE WE
HAD SHORTLY AFTER DALLAS.
WHERE YOU TALKED TO POLICE
OFFICERS, I HAVE POLICE OFFICERS
IN MY FAMILY WHO TALKED ABOUT
THIS AS WELL.
POLICE OFFICERS ACROSS THE
COUNTRY WERE FRIGHTENED, THEY
WERE VERY SCARED, PERHAPS MORE
AFRAID THAN THEY HAVE BEEN IN
YEARS.
AND THE ACT OF A LOT OF BLACK
LIVES MATTER DEMONSTRATORS WAS
TO RATCHET UP TENSIONS.
AND IN PLACES LIKE BATON ROUGE
AND ST. PAUL AND CHICAGO, TO
BECOME VIOLENT.
THAT TO ME SAYS THAT A LOT OF
ACTIVISTS ARE DEMANDING
SOMETHING OF PEOPLE WHO DON'T
UNDERSTAND THE FEAR IN THE BLACK
COMMUNITY AND THEY'RE NOT
WILLING TO DO THAT FOR LAW
ENFORCEMENT AND FOR OTHERS.
>> FINAL QUESTION FOR ALL OF
YOU.
WHAT COULD EACH OF YOU DO WITH
PEOPLE WHO ARE IN YOUR
COMMUNITY, WHO ARE LIKE-MINDED
FOLKS WHETHER THEY BE ACTIVISTS
OR POLICE OFFICERS OR
CONSERVATIVE OR WRITERS AND
JOURNALISTS WHAT IS ONE THING
THAT YOUR COMMUNITY COULD DO TO
HELP FIND COMMON GROUND WITH
OTHER PEOPLE?
WHAT DO YOU ANY ONE THING?
>> PROMOTE IT IS IDEA THAT WE
HAVE TO BEGIN HONEST
CONVERSATION AND DIALOGUE, LET'S
NOT BE IN DENIAL ABOUT THE ROLE
THAT RACE PLACE IN LAW
ENFORCEMENT.
DON'T BE NAIVE ABOUT THE RACE
PLACE, DO NOT DISMISS THE
EXPERIENCES OF MY COMMUNITY, FOR
EXAMPLE.
IT'S NOT COLLECTIVE
HALLUCINATION, IT'S REALITY,
SUBSTANTIATE THAT.
HONEST EDUCATION AT LEAST ACTION
IS THE KEY.
>> WHAT IS SOMETHING THAT
ACTIVIST CAN DO TO HELP FIND
COMMON GROUND WITH OTHER FOLK?
>> ACTIVISTS RIGHT NOW REALLY
FEEL IT'S PREMATURE TO JUMP TOP
A KUMBAYA MOMENT, BECAUSE SO
MANY FAMILIES ARE WAITING FOR
JUDGMENT.
THE MOMENT HAS TO HAPPEN BEFORE
COMING TOGETHER HAS TO DEAL WITH
THE ONGOING DENIAL OF JUSTICE IS
HAPPENING.
WE HAVE TO ACTUALLY DEAL WITH
THAT AND DEAL WITH THOSE
INCIDENTS BEFORE WE CAN COME
TOGETHER AND HAVE SOME TYPE OF
RESOLVE.
THE PAIN HAS TO STOP FIRST
BEFORE YOU CAN COME TOGETHER.
>> IAN, TO YOU?
>> WELL, SPOKE EARLIER ABOUT
THAT, THAT ACTIVE IMAGINATION,
THE ACT OF COMPASSION WHICH I
THINK IS IMPORTANT FOR WRITERS
WHO ARE OFFERING OPINIONS AND
FREQUENTLY SPEND THEIR TIME
NEEDLING AND THE REST, THAT'S
SORT OF THE NATURE, BUT ALSO A
LOT OF US ARE ON THE FRONT LINES
OF POLICY DISCUSSIONS AND I
THINK LOOKING FOR ACTIVE WAYS IN
WHICH THROUGH MUNICIPAL
GOVERNMENTS OR STATE GOVERNMENTS
PARTICULARLY WE CAN FIND REFORMS
THAT LAW ENFORCEMENT AND
ACTIVISTS CAN GET BEHIND TO PUSH
THIS EFFORT FORWARD.
>> IAN TUTTLE, MONIFA BANDELE
AND MARQUEZ CLAXTON, THANK YOU
SO MUCH.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING US.
>> Stewart: BEFORE WE GO, A
REMINDER THAT YOU CAN WATCH THIS
PROGRAM ANY TIME, ADD YOUR
COMMENTS, AND LEARN MORE ABOUT
THESE ISSUES AND OUR DISCUSSIONS
TONIGHT ONLINE AT
pbs.org/newshour.
USE THE HASHTAG
#AMERICABLACKANDBLUEPBS.
THIS HAS BEEN A PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND SPECIAL REPORT: AMERICA
IN BLACK AND BLUE.
THANK YOU FOR WATCHING.
I'M ALISON STEWART.
GOOD NIGHT.
Captioning sponsored by WNET
Captioned by
Media Access Group at WGBH
access.wgbh.org
>>PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND IS MADE
POSSIBLE BY:
BERNARD AND IRENE SCHWARTZ.
JUDY AND JOSH WESTON.
THE CHERYL AND PHILIP MILSTEIN
FAMILY.
THE JOHN AND HELEN GLESSNER
FAMILY TRUST.
SUPPORTING TRUSTWORTHY
JOURNALISM THAT INFORMS AND
INSPIRES.
SUE AND EDGAR WACHENHEIM, III.
CORPORATE FUNDING IS PROVIDED
BY MUTUAL OF AMERICA--
DESIGNING CUSTOMIZED INDIVIDUAL
AND GROUP RETIREMENT PRODUCTS.
THAT'S WHY WE ARE YOUR
RETIREMENT COMPANY.
ADDITIONAL SUPPORT HAS BEEN
PROVIDED BY:
AND BY THE CORPORATION FOR
PUBLIC BROADCASTING, AND BY
CONTRIBUTIONS TO YOUR PBS
STATION FROM VIEWERS LIKE YOU.
THANK YOU.